Justice Department warns tech companies as Facebook and Twitter defend themselves in Congress

The Justice Department warned on Wednesday that leading technology companies may be “intentionally stifling the free exchange of ideas” and hurting competition, an ominous development for an industry already under fire from Capitol Hill, President Trump and a range of conservative critics.

The two-sentence statement, which didn’t elaborate on the allegation or explicitly threaten legal action, echoed tweets by Trump last week claiming that the technology industry was biased against conservatives. The White House later threatened new regulation of the search giant Google, which legal experts said would violate constitutional protections on free speech.

The Justice Department made its announcement at the conclusion of a Senate hearing in which Facebook and Twitter executives faced sharp questioning on a number of subjects — including allegations that social media platforms mute conservative voices. Google offered to send an executive to the hearing, but the Senate committee rebuffed him because it wanted the chief executive of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, to appear.

The combination of government action, including a coming meeting between Attorney General Jeff Sessions and several attorneys general, alarmed the technology industry. It has been playing defense for nearly two years over allegations that it failed to adequately combat the spread of phony news reports and Russian disinformation during the 2016 presidential election.

Outside legal experts, meanwhile, expressed concern that the rising political pressure over unproven allegations of bias will end up chilling constitutionally protected speech by technology companies.

“This could be a very serious broadside against the entire Internet industry coordinated by multiple layers of government,” said Eric Goldman, co-director of the High Tech Law Institute at Santa Clara University, in Silicon Valley.

The meeting with state attorneys general will “discuss a growing concern that these companies may be hurting competition and intentionally stifling the free exchange of ideas on their platforms,” according to the Justice Department statement.

It noted that government lawyers had been listening to the Senate Intelligence Committee hearing “closely,” though issues of bias played a relatively small role in the hearing. The subject was the focus of a later one, Wednesday afternoon, before the House Energy & Commerce Committee with only Twitter.

The Sessions meeting with the state attorneys general, which was planned before Wednesday’s Senate hearing but not previously announced, is tentatively scheduled for Sept. 25 in Washington, according to a person familiar with the plans who was not authorized to speak publicly. Justice Department officials declined to specify which states would be represented, but the attorneys general in several states have opened investigations into technology companies in the past two years on various issues.

Sessions regularly faces withering public criticism from Trump, but he has also been one of the president’s most loyal supporters, particularly on policy matters such as immigration and policing. Sessions’ statement Wednesday on social media firms marks another instance in which he has echoed points raised earlier by the president.

Google, Twitter and Facebook all declined to comment in response to the Justice Department statement. All three have repeatedly denied allowing political views to shape what content appears on their platforms.

Twitter Chief Executive Jack Dorsey said in the Senate Intelligence Committee hearing Wednesday morning, “Impartiality is our guiding principle.”

In written testimony submitted ahead of the hearing, he cited a study by the company that concluded that tweets by Democratic and Republican lawmakers have equal reach.



##NXP eyes IoT, smart vehicle opportunities
NXP Semiconductors, the world's top chip maker for the auto industry, is ramping up resources to tap into the internet of things and smart vehicle opportunities in China, where local consumers are highly responsive to new technologies.

The company announced on Tuesday that it has inked a partnership with Foxconn Industrial Internet Co Ltd, a subsidiary of the world's largest contract manufacturer Foxconn Technology Group, to pursue growth in the industrial internet of things sector.

The move is part of broader deals NXP has inked with Chinese companies including one with Iris Recognition, a leading computer vision player at a major tech conference in Shenzhen, Guangdong province, recently.

Steve Owen, executive vice president of sales and marketing at NXP Semiconductors, said as the trends of connectivity, electrification and autonomy continue in the automobile sector, the semiconductor value in each car will be more than tripled in the future from $380 in 2017.

More than 90 percent of innovation in cars will be from electronics, which will spur demand for chips. The opportunities in China are pretty strong given that local carmakers, consumers and governments are keen to embrace autonomous and connectivity technologies, Owen said.

The Dutch company has already partnered with Chinese internet behemoth Baidu Inc in offering safety technologies for smart-driving experiences. It has also teamed up with Alibaba Group Holding Ltd to integrate its in-car entertainment platforms and technologies to the latter's automobile operating system. The two sides aim to have more than one million cars equipped with such a system by 2020.

The company has also set up an application center in Chongqing to ensure that its increasingly complex products, especially microprocessors, can fully support local partners.

Earlier this year, the United States semiconductor giant Qualcomm Inc gave up its proposal to acquire NXP, a deal that had been going on for almost two years.

Lu Wenliang, an expert at the research institute of the China Center for Information Industry Development, said the deal failure resulted in some loss of clients for NXP, but on the whole had limited impact on its products.

